\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@setfilename oci2bin.info
@settitle oci2bin Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for oci2bin (version 0.1.0).

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 latedeployment.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the MIT License.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Containers
@direntry
* oci2bin: (oci2bin).   Convert OCI images to self-contained executables.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title oci2bin Manual
@subtitle Convert Docker/OCI images into self-contained rootless container executables
@subtitle Version 0.1.0
@author The oci2bin project
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top oci2bin

@insertcopying

@menu
* Overview::                    What oci2bin does
* Feature Reference::           Every build and runtime flag, by category
* Getting Started::             Installation and first steps
* Building Binaries::           Build options and image customisation
* Running Containers::          Runtime options reference
* Namespace Sharing::           Sharing network and IPC between containers
* Isolation and Security::      Networking, capabilities, seccomp
* Process Management::          Init, detach, signals
* Subcommands::                 inspect, list, prune, diff
* How It Works::                Polyglot format, loader internals
* Environment Variables::       Variables read by oci2bin
* Files::                       Paths used at runtime and build time
* Index::                       Concept and option index
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Overview
@chapter Overview

@cindex overview
@cindex polyglot binary

@command{oci2bin} converts any Docker or OCI image into a single,
self-contained ELF64 executable.  The output requires only @command{tar}
on the target machine—no Docker daemon, no container runtime, no
installation.

The output file is also a valid POSIX tar archive accepted by
@command{docker load}, making it a polyglot binary (@pxref{How It
Works}).

@example
oci2bin alpine:latest      # produces ./alpine_latest
./alpine_latest            # runs the container
docker load < alpine_latest
@end example

Containers run rootlessly using Linux user namespaces.  The process
appears as UID@tie{}0 inside the container; on the host it runs as the
invoking user with no elevated privileges.

@quotation Note
This manual covers the core workflow.  The complete and authoritative
reference is the project @file{README} and the documentation site under
@file{docs/}, which always track the current feature set (including the
@option{--restart}, @option{--health}, @option{--gpus}/@option{--cdi-device},
@option{--profile}, and @option{--compress-binary} options, Rekor signing, and
the @command{oci2bin up}/@command{down}/@command{stack} declarative-stack
commands).
@end quotation

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Feature Reference
@chapter Feature Reference

A categorized list of every option and capability. Later chapters cover the
common ones in depth; the @file{README} and @file{docs/} site are the
exhaustive reference.

@section Build inputs and transformations

@table @code
@item IMAGE / IMAGE@@sha256:DIGEST
Build from a tag or a validated content digest (the digest is verified;
mismatch aborts).
@item --oci-dir DIR / --tar FILE
Build from an OCI layout dir or a saved tar instead of pulling.
@item --pull-with docker|podman|skopeo
Force the pull backend for the default @code{IMAGE} build (auto-detect order:
docker, podman, skopeo). @code{skopeo} pulls daemonlessly, so no container
engine is required; it does not support @option{--layer}, @option{--offline-only},
or cosign verification.
@item --arch x86_64|aarch64|all
Cross-compile (both directions) or emit a multi-arch wrapper.
@item --add-file H:C / --add-dir H:C
Inject files/directories as a build-time layer.
@item --layer IMAGE
Overlay additional image layers (last image's config wins).
@item --strip / --strip-prefix P / --strip-auto
Remove docs/locales/caches; auto-detect package-manager caches.
@item --squash
Merge all layers into one squashed layer.
@item --compress none|gzip|zstd
Per-layer compression codec.
@item --compress-binary zstd
Recompress the whole payload as one zstd frame (opaque to docker load).
@item --entrypoint VALUE / --cmd VALUE
Override the embedded Entrypoint/Cmd (JSON array or shell-split).
@item --label K=V
Add image-config labels (matchable by ps/list --filter).
@item --cache / --no-cache
Output-binary cache; per-layer cache toggle.
@item --reproducible / --offline-only
Byte-identical output; air-gap seal (no registry fetch, hermetic marker).
@item --pin-digest auto|ALGO:auto|ALGO:HEX
Embed a digest the loader re-checks at run time.
@item --self-update-url URL
Embed a signed-update-manifest URL.
@item --embed-loader-layer / --embed-loader-labels
Persist the loader in the image so @code{reconstruct} can rebuild it.
@end table

@section Signing, attestation, and encryption

@table @code
@item --verify-cosign / --require-cosign / --cosign-key K
Verify the source image's cosign signature before building.
@item --require-signed PUB
Embed a self-enforcing signature policy (refuse to run unsigned).
@item --encrypt --recipient PUB / --recipients-file F
Encrypt the payload to age recipients (opaque at rest).
@item --passphrase [--password-file F]
Symmetric (scrypt) encryption.
@end table

(See also the @code{sign}, @code{verify}, and @code{attest} subcommands, with
@option{--rekor} for a transparency-log entry and @option{--attest} for SLSA/
in-toto provenance.)

@section Runtime: command, filesystem, networking

@table @code
@item --entrypoint / --workdir / -e K=V / --env-file F
Override entrypoint, workdir, environment.
@item -v H:C / --tmpfs P / --read-only / --overlay-persist DIR
Bind mounts, tmpfs, read-only rootfs, persistent overlay upper layer.
@item --secret H[:C] / --secret tpm2:NAME / --ssh-agent
File secrets (memfd_secret-backed), TPM2-sealed secrets, SSH-agent forwarding.
@item --device /dev/H[:C] / --gpus all|N|CDI / --cdi-device KIND=DEV / --no-host-dev
Expose device nodes, GPUs/CDI devices, or skip the host /dev nodes.
@item --net host|none|slirp|pasta|container:PID / -p H:C / --allow-egress H:P
Network modes, published ports, default-deny egress allowlist.
@item --dns IP / --dns-search D / --add-host H:IP / --ipc container:PID
Custom DNS, /etc/hosts entries, shared IPC namespace.
@item --hostname N / --user UID[:GID]
UTS hostname; run as a numeric user.
@end table

@section Runtime: isolation, limits, supervision, observability

@table @code
@item --cap-drop / --cap-add / --no-seccomp / --seccomp-profile F / --gen-seccomp F / --seccomp-deny-write P
Capability and seccomp controls; generate a least-privilege profile.
@item --landlock / --no-landlock / --security-opt apparmor=|label=
Landlock sandbox (auto by default); AppArmor/SELinux confinement.
@item --memory / --cpus / --pids-limit / --ulimit T=N / --size NAME
cgroup v2 limits, setrlimit, and resource presets.
@item --profile dev|prod|locked-down
Apply a bundle of runtime defaults.
@item --init / --detach / --name N / -it
Init reaper, background detach, naming, interactive TTY.
@item --restart no|on-failure[:N]|always|unless-stopped
Supervise and relaunch the workload.
@item --health [--health-cmd C] [--health-interval/-timeout/-retries/-start-period] / --no-health
Run the image HEALTHCHECK; restart on unhealthy when paired with --restart.
@item --metrics-socket P / --notify URL [--notify-name N] / --audit-log F / --clock-offset S
Prometheus metrics socket, lifecycle notifications, JSON audit log, time-namespace clock offset.
@item --vm [--vmm VMM] [--memory/--cpus]
Run inside a hardware-isolated microVM (libkrun or cloud-hypervisor).
@end table

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

@cindex installation
@cindex dependencies

@section Build Dependencies

@table @asis
@item Arch Linux
@code{sudo pacman -S gcc python3 docker}
@item Fedora
@code{sudo dnf install gcc glibc-static python3 docker}
@item Debian / Ubuntu
@code{sudo apt install gcc libc6-dev python3 docker.io}
@item openSUSE Tumbleweed
@code{sudo zypper install gcc glibc-devel-static python3 docker}
@item NixOS / nix-shell
@code{nix-shell -p gcc python3 docker}
@end table

@section Installation

@example
git clone https://github.com/latedeployment/oci2bin
cd oci2bin
make          # compile the loader into build/
make install  # install to /usr/local (override with PREFIX=~/.local)
@end example

After installation @command{oci2bin} is on your @env{PATH}.  To use it
without installing, run it directly from the repository root.

@section Quick Start

@example
oci2bin alpine:latest        # output: ./alpine_latest
./alpine_latest               # run default entrypoint
./alpine_latest /bin/ls /etc  # override command
oci2bin nginx:1.25 my-nginx  # explicit output name
@end example

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Building Binaries
@chapter Building Binaries

@menu
* Cross-Architecture Builds::
* Injecting Files at Build Time::
* Merging Image Layers::
* Stripping Images::
* OCI Image Layout::
* Caching::
* Digest Pinning::
@end menu

@node Cross-Architecture Builds
@section Cross-Architecture Builds

@cindex aarch64
@cindex cross compilation
@opindex --arch

Build for a foreign architecture with @option{--arch}:

@example
# Install cross-compiler (Fedora)
sudo dnf install gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu sysroot-aarch64-fc43-glibc

oci2bin --arch aarch64 alpine:latest
@end example

The sysroot defaults to @file{/usr/aarch64-redhat-linux/sys-root/fc43}.
Override with the @env{AARCH64_SYSROOT} environment variable.

Supported values for @option{--arch}: @code{x86_64}, @code{aarch64}.

@node Injecting Files at Build Time
@section Injecting Files at Build Time

@opindex --add-file
@opindex --add-dir

Use @option{--add-file HOST:CONTAINER} and @option{--add-dir
HOST:CONTAINER} to embed files or directories into the image at build
time, without needing a volume mount at runtime:

@example
oci2bin --add-file ./myapp.conf:/etc/myapp/myapp.conf myapp:latest
oci2bin --add-file /etc/ssl/certs/ca-bundle.crt:/etc/ssl/certs/ca-bundle.crt base:latest
oci2bin --add-dir ./config:/etc/myapp myapp:latest
@end example

Files are added as a new layer on top of the existing image layers.
Both flags may be repeated.

@node Merging Image Layers
@section Merging Image Layers

@opindex --layer

Use @option{--layer IMAGE} to overlay additional images on top of the
base:

@example
oci2bin --layer debugtools:latest myapp:latest myapp-debug
@end example

Layers are applied in order.  The image config (@code{Cmd},
@code{Entrypoint}, @code{Env}) from the last @option{--layer} argument
overrides the base if non-null.  May be repeated.

@node Stripping Images
@section Stripping Images

@opindex --strip

@option{--strip} removes documentation, man pages, locale data, and
package caches before packaging:

@example
oci2bin --strip ubuntu:22.04 my-ubuntu
@end example

Removed path prefixes: @file{usr/share/doc/}, @file{usr/share/man/},
@file{usr/share/info/}, @file{usr/share/locale/},
@file{usr/share/i18n/}, @file{var/cache/apt/},
@file{var/lib/apt/lists/}, @file{tmp/}.

@node OCI Image Layout
@section Using OCI Image Layout

@opindex --oci-dir
@cindex skopeo
@cindex crane

Use @option{--oci-dir DIR} to build from an OCI image layout directory
instead of pulling via Docker.  Compatible with @command{skopeo},
@command{crane}, @command{buildah}, and other OCI-compliant tools:

@example
skopeo copy docker://redis:7-alpine oci:./redis-oci:latest
oci2bin --oci-dir ./redis-oci redis:7-alpine redis_7-alpine
@end example

The @var{IMAGE} argument is optional when @option{--oci-dir} is given
and is used only for the output filename default and embedded metadata.

@node Caching
@section Caching

@opindex --cache
@cindex cache

@option{--cache} stores the output binary in
@file{~/.cache/oci2bin/@var{image}_@var{digest}/output} so that
repeated builds of the same image are instant:

@example
oci2bin --cache alpine:latest   # builds and caches
oci2bin --cache alpine:latest   # returns cached binary immediately
@end example

The cache key includes the first 12 hex characters of the image's
sha256 digest, so tag updates produce a fresh cache entry.

Use the @code{list} and @code{prune} subcommands to manage the cache
(@pxref{Subcommands}).

@node Digest Pinning
@section Reproducible Builds and Digest Pinning

After pulling, oci2bin prints the content-addressed digest to stderr:

@example
oci2bin: image digest: redis@@sha256:abc123...
@end example

When @option{--cache} is active, the cache key includes the digest so
that @code{redis:latest} updates produce a fresh cache entry rather than
reusing a stale binary.

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Running Containers
@chapter Running Containers

By default the binary executes the image's configured entrypoint,
equivalent to @command{docker run @var{IMAGE}}.  Arguments after the
binary name replace the default command:

@example
./alpine_latest                          # default entrypoint
./alpine_latest /bin/ls /etc             # override CMD
./alpine_latest /bin/sh -c 'uname -a'
./alpine_latest -- -v                    # '--' ends option parsing
@end example

@menu
* Volume Mounts::
* Secrets::
* Container Environment::         (-e, --env-file)
* Entrypoint and WorkingDir::
* User and Hostname::
* Resource Limits::
* SSH Agent Forwarding::
* Extra tmpfs Mounts::
* Exposing Host Devices::
* Exit Codes::
@end menu

@node Volume Mounts
@section Volume Mounts

@opindex -v

@option{-v HOST:CONTAINER} bind-mounts a host path into the container.
The mount point is created inside the container if it does not exist.
The container path must be absolute and must not contain @code{..}.
May be repeated (up to 32).

@example
./alpine_latest -v /data:/data /bin/ls /data
./alpine_latest -v /data/input:/input -v /data/output:/output \
  /bin/sh -c 'cp /input/file /output/'
@end example

@node Secrets
@section Secrets

@opindex --secret

@option{--secret HOST_FILE[:CONTAINER_PATH]} bind-mounts a single host
file into the container read-only.  If @var{CONTAINER_PATH} is omitted,
the file lands at @file{/run/secrets/@var{basename}}.  Enforced with
@code{MS_RDONLY|MS_NOEXEC|MS_NOSUID|MS_NODEV}.  May be repeated.

@example
./my-app --secret ~/.config/api_key           # -> /run/secrets/api_key
./my-app --secret /etc/ssl/cert.pem:/certs/ca.pem
@end example

@node Container Environment
@section Container Environment

@opindex -e
@opindex --env-file

@option{-e KEY=VALUE} sets a variable inside the container.
@option{-e KEY} (no @code{=}) passes a variable from the host; if it is
not set on the host, a warning is printed and it is skipped.

@option{--env-file FILE} loads @code{KEY=VALUE} pairs from a file.
Blank lines and @code{#} comments are ignored.  @option{--env-file} and
@option{-e} are additive; files are processed before @option{-e} flags.

@example
./alpine_latest -e DEBUG=1 /bin/sh -c 'echo $DEBUG'
./my-app --env-file /etc/myapp.env -e OVERRIDE=1
@end example

@node Entrypoint and WorkingDir
@section Entrypoint and Working Directory

@opindex --entrypoint
@opindex --workdir

@option{--entrypoint PATH} overrides the image's OCI entrypoint.

@option{--workdir PATH} sets the working directory inside the container,
overriding the image's @code{WorkingDir}.  Defaults to @file{/} if
neither is set.

@example
./alpine_latest --entrypoint /bin/sh -c 'echo hello'
./my-app --workdir /app
@end example

@node User and Hostname
@section User and Hostname

@opindex --user
@opindex --hostname

@option{--user UID[:GID]} runs the container process as the given
numeric UID and optional GID.  Both values must be integers
@leq{}@tie{}65534.  @code{setgroups}, @code{setgid}, and @code{setuid}
are called; if any fail the container exits immediately.

@option{--hostname NAME} sets the hostname inside the UTS namespace.
Defaults to @code{oci2bin}.

@example
./my-app --user 1000:1000
./my-app --hostname mycontainer
@end example

@node Resource Limits
@section Resource Limits

@opindex --ulimit
@cindex ulimit
@cindex setrlimit

@option{--ulimit TYPE=N} sets resource limits via @code{setrlimit(2)}.
Both soft and hard limits are set to @var{N}.  May be repeated.

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@headitem Type @tab Meaning
@item @code{nofile} @tab Maximum number of open file descriptors
@item @code{nproc}  @tab Maximum number of processes
@item @code{cpu}    @tab CPU time limit (seconds)
@item @code{as}     @tab Maximum virtual memory (bytes)
@item @code{fsize}  @tab Maximum file size (bytes)
@end multitable

@example
./my-app --ulimit nofile=1024 --ulimit nproc=64
./my-app --ulimit as=536870912     # 512 MiB virtual memory
@end example

@node SSH Agent Forwarding
@section SSH Agent Forwarding

@opindex --ssh-agent
@cindex SSH agent

@option{--ssh-agent} forwards the host @env{SSH_AUTH_SOCK} Unix socket
into the container at @file{/run/ssh-agent.sock} and sets
@env{SSH_AUTH_SOCK} accordingly.  The socket is bind-mounted read-only.
If @env{SSH_AUTH_SOCK} is unset or points to a non-socket, a warning is
printed and the container runs without agent forwarding.

@example
./my-app --ssh-agent /bin/sh -c 'ssh git@@github.com'
@end example

@node Extra tmpfs Mounts
@section Extra tmpfs Mounts

@opindex --tmpfs

@option{--tmpfs PATH} mounts a fresh in-memory filesystem at @var{PATH}
inside the container.  Useful for writable scratch space when
@option{--read-only} is active.  @var{PATH} must be absolute and must
not contain @code{..}.  May be repeated.

@example
./my-app --read-only --tmpfs /tmp --tmpfs /var/cache
@end example

@node Exposing Host Devices
@section Exposing Host Devices

@opindex --device

@option{--device /dev/HOST[:CONTAINER]} exposes a host device node
inside the container.  The host path must start with @file{/dev/}.  The
container path defaults to the host path if omitted.  @code{mknod(2)}
is attempted first; on failure a bind mount is used.  May be repeated.

@example
./my-app --device /dev/nvidia0         # GPU passthrough
./my-app --device /dev/ttyUSB0         # serial port
./my-app --device /dev/snd:/dev/snd    # audio
@end example

@node Exit Codes
@section Exit Codes

The container process exit status is forwarded to the caller.

@example
./alpine_latest /bin/sh -c 'exit 42'
echo $?   # prints 42
@end example

If the container process was killed by a signal, the exit status is 1.
Fatal setup errors (namespace creation, extraction failure) also exit
with status 1.

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Namespace Sharing
@chapter Sharing Namespaces Between Containers

@cindex namespace sharing
@cindex sidecar
@cindex IPC
@cindex network namespace
@opindex --net container
@opindex --ipc container

Two containers can share the same network or IPC namespace.  This
enables sidecar patterns (e.g.@: a proxy sharing network with a
service) and inter-container IPC without a shared daemon.

@section Sharing the Network Namespace

@option{--net container:@var{PID}} joins the network namespace of the
process with PID @var{PID}.  The container shares all network
interfaces, routing tables, and port bindings with that process.

@example
# Start the main container detached, capture its PID
./myapp --net none --detach
MAIN_PID=$!

# Sidecar joins the same network namespace
./sidecar --net container:$MAIN_PID
@end example

@section Sharing the IPC Namespace

@option{--ipc container:@var{PID}} joins the IPC namespace of the
process with PID @var{PID}.  Shared resources include:

@itemize
@item SysV semaphores (@code{semget}/@code{semop})
@item SysV message queues (@code{msgget}/@code{msgsnd}/@code{msgrcv})
@item SysV shared memory (@code{shmget}/@code{shmat})
@end itemize

@example
./service --ipc container:$MAIN_PID
@end example

@section Combining Both Flags

@example
./sidecar --net container:$MAIN_PID --ipc container:$MAIN_PID
@end example

@section POSIX Shared Memory

POSIX shared memory (@code{shm_open}, @file{/dev/shm}) lives in the
mount namespace and is not shared by @option{--ipc container:@var{PID}}.
To share it, bind-mount the same @file{/dev/shm} path into both
containers:

@example
./myapp    -v /dev/shm:/dev/shm
./sidecar  -v /dev/shm:/dev/shm
@end example

Or share the other container's @file{/dev/shm} directly:

@example
./sidecar -v /proc/$MAIN_PID/root/dev/shm:/dev/shm
@end example

@section Privilege Note

Joining a network or IPC namespace created by another container requires
that both containers were started by a process with matching user
namespace ownership, or that the joining process has root privileges.
If @code{setns(2)} fails, a descriptive error is printed and the
container exits.

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Isolation and Security
@chapter Isolation and Security

@menu
* Networking Modes::
* Read-Only Rootfs::
* Capabilities::
* Seccomp Filter::
* User Namespace::
@end menu

@node Networking Modes
@section Networking Modes

@opindex --net

@table @option
@item --net host
Share the host network stack (default).
@item --net none
Create an isolated network namespace with only a loopback interface.
@item --net container:@var{PID}
Join the network namespace of process @var{PID}.
@end table

@node Read-Only Rootfs
@section Read-Only Rootfs

@opindex --read-only
@cindex overlayfs

@option{--read-only} mounts the rootfs read-only via overlayfs.  Writes
go to a temporary upper layer discarded on exit; the on-disk rootfs is
never modified.  Falls back to read-write with a warning if overlayfs is
unavailable.

@example
./my-app --read-only
./my-app --read-only --tmpfs /tmp --tmpfs /var/run
@end example

@node Capabilities
@section Capabilities

@opindex --cap-drop
@opindex --cap-add
@cindex capabilities

@option{--cap-drop CAP} drops a capability from the bounding and
effective sets.  Pass @code{all} to drop every capability.
@option{--cap-add CAP} raises a capability as ambient so it survives
@code{exec(2)}.  Both are case-insensitive and the @code{CAP_} prefix is
optional.

@example
./my-app --cap-drop all
./my-app --cap-drop all --cap-add net_bind_service
./my-app --cap-drop net_raw --cap-drop sys_ptrace
@end example

@node Seccomp Filter
@section Seccomp Filter

@opindex --no-seccomp
@cindex seccomp

A default seccomp-BPF filter blocks syscalls with no legitimate use
inside a container:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@headitem Blocked syscall @tab Reason
@item @code{kexec_load}, @code{kexec_file_load} @tab Load a new kernel
@item @code{reboot} @tab Reboot the host
@item @code{syslog} @tab Kernel ring buffer access
@item @code{perf_event_open} @tab Used in kernel exploit chains
@item @code{bpf} @tab Load arbitrary BPF programs
@item @code{add_key}, @code{request_key}, @code{keyctl} @tab Kernel keyring manipulation
@item @code{userfaultfd} @tab Exploited in kernel escapes
@item @code{pivot_root} @tab Namespace escape vector
@item @code{ptrace} @tab Container escape
@item @code{process_vm_readv}, @code{process_vm_writev} @tab Cross-process memory access
@item @code{init_module}, @code{finit_module} @tab Kernel module loading
@end multitable

@code{PR_SET_NO_NEW_PRIVS} is always set.  To disable the filter:

@example
./my-app --no-seccomp
@end example

@node User Namespace
@section User Namespace

The loader always creates a user namespace (CLONE_NEWUSER) and maps the
host UID to UID@tie{}0 inside the container.  This makes the process
appear as root inside the container without granting real host
privileges.

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Process Management
@chapter Process Management

@menu
* Init Process::
* Background Detach::
@end menu

@node Init Process
@section Init Process and Zombie Reaping

@opindex --init
@cindex zombie reaping
@cindex PID 1

@option{--init} runs a tiny zombie-reaping init as PID@tie{}1.  The
entrypoint is forked as a child; the parent loops reaping zombies.
@code{SIGTERM}, @code{SIGINT}, @code{SIGHUP}, @code{SIGUSR1}, and
@code{SIGUSR2} are forwarded to the child.  When the main child exits,
remaining zombies are drained and the exit status is returned.

@example
./my-app --init
./my-app --init --detach   # fully-managed background service
@end example

@node Background Detach
@section Running in Background

@opindex --detach

@option{--detach} (or @option{-d}) forks the container to the
background, prints the child PID to stdout, and exits.  The child calls
@code{setsid(2)} to detach from the terminal and redirects stdin from
@file{/dev/null}.

@example
PID=$(./redis --detach)
echo "Redis running as PID $PID"
sleep 1
kill "$PID"
@end example

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Subcommands
@chapter Subcommands

Besides building, the @command{oci2bin} CLI provides these subcommands.

@table @code
@item oci2bin inspect BINARY [--json | --format TMPL]
Show embedded image metadata (name, arch, layers, entrypoint, cmd, env,
workdir, digest, build time); secret-shaped env values are redacted.
@item oci2bin explain BINARY [--json]
Inspect plus a host-capability check of what the binary needs to run.
@item oci2bin doctor [--json]
Probe the host for oci2bin's toolchain/kernel features and print a fix command
for each missing piece.
@item oci2bin list [--json]
List cached binaries.
@item oci2bin prune [--dry-run]
Remove stale cache entries.
@item oci2bin diff OLD NEW
Compare two binaries' filesystems (@code{+}/@code{-}/@code{M}).
@item oci2bin diff-fs OVERLAY_PATH
Classify an overlayfs upperdir (after @option{--overlay-persist}).
@item oci2bin sbom BINARY
Generate a Software Bill of Materials for the embedded image.
@item oci2bin reconstruct SRC [--output PATH]
Rebuild a polyglot from an image/tar carrying an embedded loader.
@item oci2bin push BINARY REF
Push the embedded image payload to an OCI registry.
@item oci2bin exec PID [--] CMD ...
Run a command inside a running container's namespaces (needs @command{nsenter}).
@item oci2bin ps / stop NAME / logs [-f] NAME
List, stop, and tail named detached containers.
@item oci2bin top [--once] [--interval SEC]
Live per-container resource stats.
@item oci2bin systemd BINARY [--user] [--restart POLICY]
Print a systemd unit for the binary.
@item oci2bin healthcheck BINARY [--pid PID]
Run the image's HEALTHCHECK once and report the result.
@item oci2bin freeze NAME [-- CMD] / thaw NAME
Quiesce SQLite-backed volumes for a consistent snapshot, and release it.
@item oci2bin checkpoint NAME / restore NAME
Dump and restore a running container with CRIU.
@item oci2bin sign --key KEY --in BIN [--rekor] [--attest A] / verify --key PUB --in BIN
Sign a binary (optionally publishing a Rekor entry / embedding an attestation)
and verify it.
@item oci2bin sign-file / verify-file
Sign or verify an arbitrary detached file.
@item oci2bin pod run [--net shared] [--ipc shared] BIN ...
Run several binaries sharing namespaces.
@item oci2bin up [-f stack.yaml] [-d] / down / stack @{up|down|logs|config@}
Bring a declarative stack of binaries up and down.
@item oci2bin run [BUILD_OPTS] IMAGE [-- ARGS]
Build to a temp file and run it in one step.
@item oci2bin from-chroot DIR [-o OUT] / build-dockerfile [-f FILE]
Build without Docker — from a chroot directory or a Dockerfile.
@item oci2bin mcp-serve [--allow-net]
Serve the Model Context Protocol interface for AI-agent integration.
@end table

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node How It Works
@chapter How It Works

@cindex polyglot
@cindex ELF
@cindex tar archive

The output file is a polyglot: simultaneously a valid ELF64 executable
and a valid POSIX tar archive.

@example
Byte   0-3:   7f 45 4c 46   ELF magic  (kernel identifies as executable)
Byte 257-262: 75 73 74 61   ustar\0    (tar identifies as archive)
@end example

The 64-byte ELF header fits within the tar header's 100-byte filename
field.  When executed, the kernel processes the ELF; when passed to
@command{tar} or @command{docker load}, the tar structure is read.

@section File Layout

@example
[0-63]       ELF64 header  (embedded in the tar filename field)
[64-511]     Remaining tar header fields (ustar magic at byte 257)
[512-4095]   NUL padding   (page-aligns the loader for mmap)
[4096-~75K]  Loader binary (statically linked, gcc -static -O2 -s)
[~75K-end]   OCI image tar (manifest.json, config, layer tarballs)
@end example

@section Runtime Sequence

@enumerate
@item
Open @file{/proc/self/exe} and read the embedded OCI tar from the
patched offset.
@item
Extract image layers into a temporary rootfs under @file{/tmp} using
@command{tar --no-same-permissions --no-same-owner}.
@item
Patch @file{/etc/passwd} and @file{/etc/group} for single-UID namespace
compatibility (all UIDs/GIDs set to@tie{}0, except 65534).
@item
Enter a user namespace (@code{CLONE_NEWUSER}); map host UID to
container UID@tie{}0.
@item
Optionally join a shared network or IPC namespace via @code{setns(2)}.
@item
Enter mount, PID, and UTS namespaces.
@item
Apply volume bind mounts; optionally set up overlayfs.
@item
@code{chroot(2)} into the rootfs; mount @file{/proc}, @file{/tmp},
@file{/dev}.
@item
Apply seccomp filter, capabilities, UID drop.
@item
@code{exec(2)} the entrypoint.
@end enumerate

@section Security Properties

@itemize
@item
The process is unprivileged on the host; @code{CLONE_NEWUSER} does not
confer real root.
@item
Layer and config paths from the OCI manifest are validated against path
traversal.
@item
Volume container paths must be absolute and must not contain @code{..}.
@item
Tar extraction uses @option{--no-same-permissions --no-same-owner} to
prevent setuid bit restoration.
@item
Temporary directories are created with @code{mkdtemp} (mode
@code{0700}).
@end itemize

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Environment Variables
@chapter Environment Variables

@section Run time (read by the produced binary)

@table @env
@item OCI2BIN_DEBUG
Any value enables verbose runtime diagnostics (same as @option{--debug}).
@item OCI2BIN_TMPDIR
Directory for the runtime extraction tmpdir; tried before @env{TMPDIR}.
Point at a tmpfs for speed and to keep the rootfs off disk.
@item TMPDIR
Fallback extraction directory (then @file{/tmp}, then @file{/var/tmp}).
@item OCI2BIN_IDENTITY
Path to the age identity (or SSH private key) used to decrypt an
@option{--encrypt} recipient image.
@item OCI2BIN_PASSWORD / OCI2BIN_PASSWORD_FILE
Passphrase (or a file whose first line is the passphrase) for a
@option{--passphrase} image.
@item OCI2BIN_CDI_DIR
Extra directory searched first for CDI specs, ahead of @file{/etc/cdi}
and @file{/run/cdi} (@option{--gpus} / @option{--cdi-device}).
@item SSH_AUTH_SOCK
Path to the SSH agent socket forwarded when @option{--ssh-agent} is
given.
@item HOME
Base for the named-container state directory
(@file{~/.cache/oci2bin/containers/}).
@end table

@section Build time (read by the oci2bin CLI)

@table @env
@item OCI2BIN_HOME
Override the directory where shared resources are found
(@file{build_polyglot.py}, pre-built loader binaries).  Set
automatically by @command{make install} to
@file{@var{PREFIX}/share/oci2bin}.
@item AARCH64_SYSROOT / X86_64_SYSROOT
Override the sysroot used by the aarch64 / x86_64 cross-compiler.
aarch64 default: @file{/usr/aarch64-redhat-linux/sys-root/fc43}.
@item SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH
Fixed timestamp for @option{--reproducible} / @option{--offline-only}
builds.
@item VM_CPUS / VM_MEM_MB
Default vCPU count and memory (MiB) baked into a VM-mode binary.
@item XDG_CACHE_HOME / XDG_DATA_HOME
Override @file{~/.cache} (build/layer caches) and @file{~/.local/share}
(detached-stack manifests, freeze tokens).
@end table

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Files
@chapter Files

@table @file
@item ~/.cache/oci2bin/
Per-image build cache used by @option{--cache}.  Each entry is a
directory named @file{@var{image}_@var{digest}/} containing the output
binary.
@item /proc/self/exe
The loader opens this path to read its embedded OCI data at runtime.
@item @var{PREFIX}/bin/oci2bin
The CLI wrapper script installed by @command{make install}.
@item @var{PREFIX}/share/oci2bin/build/loader-x86_64
Pre-compiled static loader for x86_64.
@item @var{PREFIX}/share/oci2bin/build/loader-aarch64
Pre-compiled static loader for aarch64.
@item @var{PREFIX}/share/oci2bin/scripts/build_polyglot.py
Polyglot builder script.
@item @var{PREFIX}/share/oci2bin/src/loader.c
Loader source code.
@end table

@c ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
